# CliXO (Clique eXtracted Ontology) 1.0

Fan Zheng (fanzheng1101@gmail.com), Trey Ideker lab, UCSD  
Date: 08/01/2018

## About

This repository is an updated version of the CliXO (Clique eXtracted Ontology) algorithm, originally associated with the following publication:

Kramer M, Dutkowski J, Yu M, Bafna V, Ideker T. Inferring gene ontologies from pairwise similarity data. Bioinformatics, 30: i34-i42. 2014. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu282

A manuscript describing this new version is under preparation.

The input of the program is a weighted similarity network of objects (in our cases, genes), and the output is a directed acyclic graph (DAG), in which the leaf nodes are genes, and non-leaf nodes are gene sets called "terms". Term A is a descendent of another term B (i.e. in the DAG there is a path from A to B) if the gene set for A is a subset of the gene set for B. The whole DAG is called a "data-driven hierarchy" inferred from the input network.

The usage of the program is similar to the original code (CliXO 0.3: https://github.com/mhk7/clixo_0.3). However, the new version has a few key improvements over the original version, increasing the accuracy and robustness inferred from pairwise similarity (weighted network) data.

## Improvments

We observed several problems in CliXO 0.3. 

1. When we visualized the hierarchical model generated by CliXO 0.3, we always saw that biggest modules in the hierarchy forming a long chain, e.g. the top 5 biggest modules A1, A2, A3, A4, A5 form a structure in which A_{i+1} belongs to A_i. Sometimes the chain can be very long. A visual example can be found in (http://atgo.ucsd.edu/). It is suspicious that such a "Russian doll" structure is a good description of the hierarchical organization of cellular components. 
2. A robust ontology inference algorithm should be insensitive to stochastic noise in the input similarity network, i.e. slightly perturbed similarity scores should not significantly affect the resulting hierarchy. However, we found CliXO 0.3 is quite sensitive to small perturbation in input scores, sometimes the content of medium-to-big size terms are very different between two input scores with >0.99 pearson correlation.
3. Sometimes we found terms for which most of the edges weights are very low, which do not look like valid terms during visualization.

We found the major cause of this problem is due to a "missing edge inference" step. The idea of CliXO is based on finding maximal cliques in the network. However, real-world networks are noisy and there could a large number of maximal cliques that are similar to each other. In CliXO 0.3, parameter BETA was introduced to merge two maximal cliques that are highly overlapping by adding the missing edges. However, during this step, the missing edges were added to the network with edge weights equal to the edge weight threshold visited in the current iteration, which makes the future iterations see an altered network. This operation leads to the arfifacts mentioned above because:

1. The network edge density was increased every time a missing edge was inferred. Thus, a big and tight component could form within a few iterations. The iterations afterwards only incrementally added the genes that has not been covered by the big component. Thus, a "long-chain" structure was formed.
2. The missing edges that were inferred early have strong impact on the results in the future iterations. Slight perturbations of edge weights could make the order of processing edges different in early iterations, which was then augmented in future iterations. Thus the results were sensitive to slight perturbations.
3. Because missing edges became "real" edges after being inferred, it is possible that in future iterations, some missing edges were clustered together to form cliques/communities. But they are false positives since their actual edge weights are weak.

We fixed this issue and the "long-chain" structure never appeared again, and two similar inputs now generate similar output hierarchies.

## Other improvements

Besides the major correction mentioned above, we also have other improvements  .

 1. We changed the definition of ALPHA parameter. CliXO 0.3 has in-depth reasoning on the definiton of ALPHA (see the paper for full discussion), but we think it does not help real-world networks very much. We simplified ALPHA so it now directly relates to the number of iterations. We think this operation improves the explainability of results and also noticed that it sometimes improves the performance of the program.
 2. CliXO is based on maximal clique finding, however, in a real-world graph usually there are too many such cliques (even the number of quasi-cliques after merging is still big). We introduced Z-modularity as a measure of statistical significance of cliques, and cliques that do not satisfying a certain cutoff were filtered. This operation increases the clarity of the output hierarchies. 


## Usage (same as CliXO 0.3)

This program is already compiled and should run without recompiling, but if it does not immediately work on your system then perform the following to compile.  This program requires g++ version 4.7 or newer to compile.  Simply enter the main folder and type:

`make clixo`

The program is run from the command line as:

`./clixo SIMILARITY_NETWORK_FILE ALPHA BETA`

The SIMILARITY_NETWORK_FILE is a file which contains three columns, tab separated.  Columns 1 and 2 are the two items (e.g. genes) which have some similarity measure between them.  Column 3 is the similarity value.  This similarity value must be positive.  Any missing similarity values in this file (i.e. no line is present for a pair of genes) are assumed to be zero.  We suggest using names including some text and not simply numbers to identify genes - if numbers are used, please make them consecutive and starting at 0 (otherwise internal terms may share the same name). 


The CliXO algorithm will print diagnostic information to stdout (we suggest redirecting this to a file).  Diagnostic information will be preceeded with a "#" symbol for easy removal later.  Most of this information is self explanatory I hope.  As terms are found to be valid (i.e. they will be included in the final ontology), they are output with tag "Valid cluster:" at the beginning of the line, followed by a tab, all the genes in the term (comma separated), followed by another tab and then the similarity value at which this term was inferred.  This allows the user to view the output so far of CliXO even if it has not completed (oftentimes many of the smaller terms are inferred quite quickly whereas larger terms can take much longer).  At completion, CliXO will print "# Ontology is:" followed by the inferred ontology.  The inferred ontology will be in a three column, tab separated format where each line represents a relationship in the ontology.  Column 1 is the parent node (always an internal node or the root, identified by a number).  Column 2 is the child node (may be an internal node or a terminal node, i.e. a gene).  Column 3 is the distance between a parent and child node (distance = half the difference in term weight between the parent and child, where term weight is the similarity value at which the term was inferred).

Please feel free to contact the author with any questions, comments, or concerns.

Auxillary functions: 

`extractOnt FILE THRESHOLD MIN_TERM_SIZE OUTFILE`

This script will allow the user to "peek" at the results of an in process CliXO run. It takes as input a CliXO output file (FILE), a similarity threshold above which terms will be saved and below which terms will be ignored (THRESHOLD), a minimum term size to keep (MIN_TERM_SIZE) and the name of an output file to create (OUTFILE).

`ontologyTermStats`

This utility will allow users to look at the ontology created by clixo.  There are several different types of stats that it can generate, but the most useful are the options "size" and "genes".  Option "size" will return a two column file where column one is the term identifier and column two is the number of leaf nodes / genes annotated to that term (all annotations are propagated upwards in the ontology).  Option "genes" adds a third column which is a comma separated list of all the genes annotated to the term.

The folder example shows some example inputs and outputs on a very small toy ontology.  The results in this directory can be recreated by running the following commands from within this directory:

`../clixo exampleInput 0 1 > exampleOutput
grep -v "#" exampleOutput > exampleOutputOnt
../ontologyTermStats exampleOutputOnt genes gene > exampleOutputOntStats
../extractOnt exampleOutput 0.5 2 examplePeek`

## Remaining issues

Since maximal clique enumeration is expensive (theoretical upper bound is exponential to the number of nodes), applying CliXO on a large number of genes is computational infeasible. If the goal is to the finish the construction of the entire hierarchy,  we recommend not to exceed 1000 genes to expect the running time to be within a few hours. 

Although there are many fast community detection graphs, most of them partition graphs into non-overlapping parts, and in other overlapping-community compatible options only a small number of nodes on the boundaries of partitions can be assigned to multiple communities. Even fewer of them have the concept of multi-scale community detection. Thus, CliXO is unique in that it can possibly found both mutl-scale and highly-overlapping community structures. We do notice that a lot of cliques found by CliXO were unnecessary since they are later removed in post-processing steps. How to utilize such information to reduce the running time of clique finding will be in our future direction.


## Acknowledgement

The improvements mentioned above would have not been possible without HiView (hiview.ucsd.edu), a web-based platform for visualizing hierarchical models developed by Keiichiro Ono.

The author also thanks Michael Ku Yu and Anton Kratz for helpful discussion.